.TH netperf 1L ""
.SH NAME

netperf \- a network performance benchmark

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B netperf
[global options] -- [test specific options]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Netperf
is a benchmark that can be used to measure various aspects of
networking performance.
Currently, its focus is on bulk data transfer and request/response
performance using either TCP or UDP, and the Berkeley Sockets
interface. In addition, tests for DLPI, the Fore ATM API, Unix Domain
Sockets, and HP HiPPI LLA may be conditionally compiled-in.

.SS GLOBAL OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-a sizespec
Alter the send and receive buffer alignments on the local system.
This defaults to 8 bytes.
.TP
.B \-A sizespec
As -a, but for the remote system.
.TP
.B \-c [rate]
Request CPU utilization and service demand calculations for the
local system. If the optional rate parameter is specified,
.B netperf
will use that instead of calculating the rate itself.
.TP
.B \-C [rate]
As -c, but for the remote system.
.TP
.B \-d
Increase the quantity of debugging output displayed during
a test (possibly at the expense of performance).
.TP
.B \-f GMKgmk
Change the units of measure for stream tests. Capital letters are
powers of two, lowercase are powers of ten.
.TP
.B \-F fill_file
Pre-fill the send buffers with data from the named file. This is
intended to provide a means for avoiding buffers that are filled with
data which is trivially easy to compress. A good choice for a file
that should be present on any system is this manpage - netperf.man.
Other files may be provided as part of the distribution.
.TP
.B \-h
Display a usage string, and exit.
.TP
.B \-H remote_host
Set the hostname (or IP address) of the remote system.
.TP
.B \-i max,min
Set the maximum and minimum number of iterations when trying to reach
certain confidence levels.
.TP
.B \-I lvl,[,intvl]
Specify the confidence level (either 95 or 99 - 99 is the default) and
the width of the confidence interval as a percentage (default 10)
.TP
.B \-l testlen
Specify the length of the test (default 10 seconds).
A negative value sets the number of request/response transactions,
or the number of bytes for a stream test.
.TP
.B \-n numcpus
Specify the number of CPU's in the system on those systems for which
netperf has no way to find the number of CPU's programatically. (all
but HP-UX)
.TP
.B \-o sizespec
Set an offset from the alignment specified with -a.
.TP
.B \-O sizespec
As -o, but for the remote system.
.TP
.B \-p portnum
Connect to a
.C netsetver
listening on the specified port, rather than using /etc/services.
.TP
.B \-P 0|1
Show (1) or suppress (0) the test banner.
.TP
.B \-t testname
Specify the test to perform.
Valid testnames are (but not always compiled-in):
.RS
.RS
.nf
.I TCP_STREAM
.I TCP_RR
.I TCP_CRR
.I UDP_STREAM
.I UDP_RR
.I TCPIPV6_STREAM
.I TCPIPV6_RR
.I TCPIPV6_CRR
.I UDPIPV6_STREAM
.I UDPIPV6_RR
.I DLCO_STREAM
.I DLCO_RR
.I DLCL_STREAM
.I DLCL_RR
.I STREAM_STREAM
.I STREAM_RR
.I DG_STREAM
.I DG_RR
.I FORE_STREAM
.I FORE_RR
.I HIPPI_STREAM
.I HIPPI_RR
.I LOC_CPU
.I REM_CPU
.fi
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B \-v verbosity
Set the verbosity level for the test (only with -P).
.TP
.B \-V
Enable the copy-avoidance features (HP-UX 9.0 and later only).

.SS TEST SPECIFIC OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-h
Display a usage string based on the test name set with -t, and exit.

Please consult the netperf manual
.I 
Netperf: A Network Performance Benchamrk 
(netperf.ps) for more information.

.SH BUGS 
There is a fairly large list of known defects and misfeatures in the
manual. If you think you have found a bug, please send email to Rick
Jones <raj@cup.hp.com>.

.SH SEE ALSO
.C netserver
.br
.I
Netperf: A Network Performance Benchmark
.br
http://www.cup.hp.com/netperf/NetperfPage.html

.SH AUTHORS
HP Information Networks Division - Networking Performance Team.
.br
Rick Jones	<raj@cup.hp.com>
.br
Karen Choy	HP IND
.br
Dave Shield	<daves@csc.liv.ac.uk>	(man pages)
.br
Others too numerous to mention here - see the ACKNWLDGMNTS file
