
== Boot Volume Directory Structure ==

This is the directory layout of the boot volume:

<pre>
home/config
	<like system, but without haiku_loader, kernel_<arch>, and runtime_loader>

system
	add-ons
	apps
	bin
	boot
	cache*
	data
	demos
	develop
	documentation
	lib
	non-packaged*
	packages*
	preferences
	servers
	settings*
	var*

	haiku_loader
	kernel_<arch>
	runtime_loader

trash
</pre>

The structure mostly equals the pre-package management directory structure with the following changes:
*<tt>common</tt> has been removed, or more correctly it has been merged into <tt>system</tt>. All system-wide software is now installed (only) in <tt>system</tt>.
*The <tt>develop</tt> directory has been removed and its contents has been moved to the <tt>system/develop</tt> directory.
*The <tt>include</tt> directory has been removed. Its contents lives in <tt>develop/headers</tt> now.
*<tt>optional</tt> has been removed. Optional features can just be installed via the package manager.
*<tt>share</tt> and <tt>etc</tt> (in <tt>common</tt>) have been removed. Their contents goes to <tt>data</tt>, <tt>documentation</tt>, or <tt>settings</tt> (in <tt>system</tt> or, for packages installed there, in <tt>home</tt>) as appropriate. There's <tt>settings/etc</tt> which is where ported Unix software will usually store their global settings.
*<tt>apps</tt> and <tt>preferences</tt> have been moved to <tt>system</tt> for consistency.
*<tt>system</tt> and <tt>home/config</tt> each sport a <tt>packages</tt> directory, which contains the activated packages.
*<tt>system</tt> and <tt>home/config</tt> themselves are mount points for two instances of the packagefs, i.e. each contains the virtually extracted contents of the activated packages in the respective <tt>packages</tt> subdirectory. The directories marked with <tt>*</tt> are "shine-through" directories. They are not provided by the packagefs, but are the underlying directories of the boot volume. Unlike the other directories they are writable.
*<tt>system</tt> and <tt>home/config</tt> each contain a directory <tt>non-packaged</tt> which has the same structure as their parent directory minus the shine-through directories. In the <tt>non-packaged</tt> directories software can be installed the traditional -- non-packaged -- way.
