== Package Management ==

This is a short index of the available package management related documentation.

*[[Infrastructure.wiki| Package Management Infrastructure]] provides an overview of what components belong to Haiku's package management infrastructure and how they work and interact.
*[[BuildingPackages.wiki| Building Packages]] gives information on various aspects of the package building process.
*[[DirectoryStructure.wiki| Boot Volume Directory Structure]] outlines the directory structure of a package management powered Haiku boot volume.
*[[FileFormat.wiki| Haiku Package File Format]] specifies in detail the file format of Haiku package files (HPKG) and Haiku package repository files (HPKR).
*[[PackagingPolicy.wiki| Packaging Policy]] defines the policy for creating Haiku packages.
*[[PackagesStatus.wiki| Packages Status]] gives an overview of the packages needed for a Haiku standard build and their current status.
*[[HybridBuilds.wiki| Hybrid Builds]] provides some information regarding hybrid builds.
*[[HaikuDepot.wiki| HaikuDepot]] explains the concept and ideas behind HaikuDepot, the GUI package manager in the making.
*[[Migration.wiki| Migration]] lists the changes that users should expect when migrating to a package management Haiku.
*[[Bootstrapping.wiki| Bootstrapping Haiku]] explains the process of bootstrapping Haiku and third-party packages.
*[[TODO.wiki| TODO]] is a list of package management related work still to be done.
*[https://www.haiku-os.org/tags/package-management/ Blog posts] on package management (the Batisseur ones are only indirectly package management related).
*[[OldIdeas.wiki| (Old) Package Management Ideas]] is a collection of thoughts and discussions regarding package management. It has been partially obsoleted by the progress on the package management implementation.
*http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rNZQQM5zU-Q&list=PL3FFCD4C6D384A302 is  a video playlist of Ingo and Oliver explaining and demonstrating the package management branch at BeGeistert 2011.


Below are links to source code related to Haiku's package management.
*Package management has been merged into "master", so see the [http://cgit.haiku-os.org/haiku/ Haiku] and [http://cgit.haiku-os.org/buildtools/ Buildtools] repositories for that
*[https://github.com/haikuports/haikuports HaikuPorts] contains the build recipes of various ports.
*[https://github.com/haikuports/haikuports.cross haikuports.cross] contains the minimal set of build recipes to bootstrap a new Haiku architecture.
*[https://github.com/haikuports/haikuporter haikuporter] is the tool to create binary packages from build recipes.
