These are the TODO items for the Haiku '''Package Management'''.

=== packagefs ===
  * If necessary, add a caching mechanism to speed up mounting it.

=== Package Daemon ===
  * Complete support for extracting and updating settings files: Merge support and user feedback are still missing.
  * Add user notification/interaction support for initial verification (on start-up).
  * Support packages being copied to the `packages` directory. Currently only moving works.

=== Package building ===
  * Define packaging guidelines and create a tool to check packages against those.
    * Status: Here's the [wiki:PackageManagement/PackagingPolicy wiki page] defining the policy. It's still a work in progress. haikuporter has some policy checking built in already.

=== Package kit/manager ===
  * Add system update support.
    * Status: Mostly functional in pkgman (`pkgman full-sync`), but unsupported in HaikuDepot.

=== Boot loader ===
  * Safe mode/recovery options:
    - Disable packages installed in home.

=== Package/package repository format ===
  * Add localization support. [http://www.freelists.org/post/haiku-depot-web/Title-localization,18 More] [http://www.freelists.org/post/haiku-depot-web/Title-localization,29 info].
  * Add support for repository keys (public/private) and package signing/check sums, so that it is possible to verify that data retrieved from a repository have not been tampered with.
  * Add package sizes to repository. Since there are plans to support xz (or other high-ratio formats) compressed uncompressed packages for download that are recompressed for installation, we probably need to discriminate between download and installation sizes.
  * Add support for a faster compression format (e.g. [https://code.google.com/p/lz4/ lz4]). As it turns out, the currently used zlib compression is rather slow (slower than reading uncompressed data from a slow HD).
  * Add MIME info for types supported by packaged applications (and sniffer rules?) to the package attributes.

=== Miscellaneous ===
  * Add MIME directory watching to registrar, so it can update the MIME DB caches when packages are de-/activated.
  * Get rid of post_install scripts. Do that in the build system.
  * Get rid of UserBootscript. Start the scripts in "~/config/settings/boot/launch" from Bootscript instead.
  * Update Installer.
